Happy Thursday, everybody. Welcome back to the Data Science Hangout. If it's your first
time joining us here today, it's so nice to meet you. I'm Rachel. Thanks for spending
your Thursday with all of us. And so the Hangout is our open space to chat about data science
leadership, questions you're facing, and getting to hear what's going on in the world of data
across different industries. So if this is your first time here, we are here every Thursday
at the same time, the same place. And if you're watching this recording on YouTube later,
you can also add it to your calendar if you want to join us virtually here on Zoom as
well. Curtis, I'm going to make sure that I made you a co-host so you can help me with
the waiting room as people are coming in here. Okay, awesome. But together, we're all
dedicated to making this a welcoming environment for everybody. So we love to hear from everyone,
no matter your years of experience, titles, industry, or languages even that you work
in. And so every week at the Hangout, I'm joined by a different leader from the community
who joins us to share their experience and answer questions from you all. So it is totally
okay to just listen in if you want, but there's also three ways you can jump in and ask questions
or provide your own perspective on certain topics. So you can raise your hand on Zoom
and I'll be sure to be on the lookout here. You can put questions in the Zoom chat and
put a little star next to it if it's something you want me to read out loud instead, or else
I'll just call on you to jump in here and join the party. But third, we also have a Slido link
where you can ask questions anonymously. And I see Hannah just shared that right as I said it.
Thank you. But I'm so excited to be joined by my co-host today, Andy Nunez Brewster. Andy is the
EMS and Trauma Research Analyst at Oregon Health Authority. And Andy, I'd love to have you jump
in here and introduce yourself, share a little bit about your role and also something you like
to do outside of work too. Sure. Okay. So I've been with the Oregon Health Authority since January
of 2020 in this role. I work with a team that coordinates the emergency medical services
throughout the state of Oregon. And so our program licenses healthcare professionals who are first
responders, including EMTs and paramedics of all kinds, all shades. And we also regulate ambulance
services. We have a data system for electronic patient care records for field responses. So
ambulance calls that do patient care or transport a patient. Every one of those patient records is
in a repository that we get. That data comes in practically real time. We have all those within
48 hours of an event. And then we also have several time-sensitive emergency registries
that we manage, including trauma and cardiac arrest and stroke. Some of those have integrations
with the EMS data. And one of the things I'm really excited about getting to work on is a
project with the Oregon Department of Transportation, where we're looking at the
feasibility of interoperability between the various EMS datasets that we have and crash data.
And so that's really exciting too. And then outside of work, I do play a couple of musical instruments
from time to time. That's a topic that comes up often in this space. And I have a couple of kids.
One of whom is about to move into a dorm at the University of Oregon in Eugene. And we just got to
take him there for a couple of orientation sessions. And I'm excited about that.
He's sort of interested in data science, which I'm crossing my fingers, but also go have fun and
have an adventure. And then I also have a two-year-old, or soon-to-be two-year-old. So
it's daycare and college at the same time for me. So I'm happy to have a permanent
government position at this time. So you are busy. Very busy. Yes. Thanks.
Well, thank you so much, Andy, for joining us. I was thinking back to when we first got to chat
one-on-one. And I think it was because you were building up your own community internally.
When we first got to chat one-on-one. So I'd love to learn more about that experience and
what led you to start an internal group as we're waiting for questions to come in from everybody.
Yeah. And I'm correcting a couple of acronyms. If folks, if I start peppering the acronyms,
I'll try to throw those in the chat too. So yeah, our community group really arose out of
a couple of sections got together, the injury and violence prevention section, and the EMS
folks in my program. And we wanted to do some training in R relating to kind of upskilling
the team to be able to collaborate. And really, we were working on a procurement for POSIT,
for enterprise solutions, so that we can use Connect and do more with the data that we have.
And so out of this training, we ended up creating a Teams group. So our whole organization,
our primary way of communicating with each other is email through Outlook and then chat through
Teams. And we have lots of channels that support various working groups. And so there was a team
channel that was created for that RStudio Academy cohort. And after the 10 weeks of us together,
we all felt like we just wanted to share everything we had learned with everyone else.
And so we opened up the group to everybody. And the first week we had, there was, so there was
eight of us to start with, we had about six people join in that first week when we finished and said,
let's just invite everyone and let's share what we've learned. The next month, there was about 40
people in that group. And by the second month, we had over 100 people in that group. And that was,
then that's only word of mouth. There isn't anyone running the group right now. We have,
it's all sort of like, we just get together and, and what do people want? What do people need?
What can folks bring? Who can we find to help bring that? And so it's, it's fairly organic. And
we're doing a little bit of work now to try to make it a little more formal. But it's still very
much a work in progress. That's great. So it all started with those people who are the academy
together? Yeah, the academy cohort. I figured it'd probably be helpful for anybody who hasn't
heard of what academy is to just explain what that process was the team went through too.
Sure. So we, we learned about it through the website, and then got in touch with, with the
folks at Posit and learned that it's, it's 10 weeks where we get them, where our group is
assigned a mentor and we get a, we get some healthcare data to work with. And we go through
some tutorial modules. Some of this is asynchronous, some of this we could choose to work
together. It was really kind of up to the group how to manage getting through the tutorial materials.
And then we would do a, an exercise each week where you reproduce something, right, either a table
or a way to clean the data and arrange it or a visualization. And then from there, build on it
on your own, right, to do something to expand upon that topic that week. And so our group really
got a couple things out of that experience, sort of drops the barriers and some of the initial
hesitation about sharing code with one another. And we learned how to support each other in
improving code and how to, it's not just about speaking, you know, kindly or, you know,
sandwiching your, your critique with some positive things. Like it's, it's more than that. It's about
understanding where each other is in the learning process and really helping each other, you know,
achieve our goals. And, and so there's a lot of, a lot of learning how to listen to each other too.
So that was really, I felt that was really, a really great thing to come away with.
That's awesome. I bet there's something to learn from that experience too. Like you had this
close-knit group of people who were already working together who helped build this community
and that's probably helped to make it successful too. I see, oh, sorry, you go ahead, Andy.
No, I was just going to say, and one of the references that I, that I've been using personally
and just sort of guiding my role in this is a book by, let's see, it's Joss Bacon, or I could
grab it real quick. It's, it's called The Art of Community. And the author is someone from the
Linux community. And, and so a lot of the content from this book and the approach from this book
has been kind of folded into the Linux Foundation culture. And, and so, you know,
anything that I've ever done that touches Linux Foundation work has just felt so,
so intentionally inclusive and just oriented in a way that I feel really strongly to,
you know, want to align with it. And so, so I've been doing a little work on my own to try to
sear my participation in that, that direction anyway. That's great. Thank you. I'm going to
jump over to some of the questions here in the chat, and I love to see the conversation happening
too. Ted, I think you had a question about the, the group. Yeah, I mean, well, Andy and I know
each other. So, hey, Andy. Hi, Ted. So one of the things that I've heard a lot with, like,
starting these groups is people really want to, want to participate, but they're so busy. Like,
so I found that one of the routes to kind of improving that is to get sponsors
among leadership. Do you have any experience with that? No, that's a really interesting idea. And
I'm curious about what the role of the sponsor really would be, because I would want to
be able to articulate that too. I'm, in my head, it sounds like kind of, like,
mentoring, like someone who's in a leadership position that can say, you know, go ahead and
participate because we're getting this value back out of it, or something along those lines. And
then folks feel like they have the space to ask for that, right? Yeah, I think, I think just someone
who can formally say that for, like, you know, an entire group, that it's okay to spend time on this.
I think also, it's just people, like, people who are willing, like, if your supervisor is
willing for you to dedicate time to it, the organization, things like that. Yeah, I mean,
right now, one of the things we're working on is getting leadership. And when I say leadership,
I mean, the Oregon Health Authority Director's Office, like our overall agency leadership is
getting some support there. We've got a couple of advocates right now. But when I mean formalizing
the support, like having something where someone's got a project they're working on,
they're spending time supporting this community. And so, that's coming from not just, you know,
our folks in public health, but that's coming from all over the agency. So, I think we're heading in
that direction. But the idea of sponsors sounds really interesting to me. It's also similar to
where it kind of, I guess it has a different level of where in the power hierarchy that it's
that it's using. But I also like the idea of having sort of like a mentor network, right,
where I know of a few folks who are working on some things that I'm trying to learn. And also,
I can share back with folks who are trying to learn some of the things that I'm working on.
And we've talked about, you know, maybe ways to do something like that with the group as well.
Really, it's about fostering connections and creating a culture of inclusivity where
everyone can do data science. Anyone here who's working with data, whether that's, you know,
language and surveys and qualitative information, or it's, you know, our quantitative
epi stuff that everyone is welcome. Everyone is here to learn. We're here to support each other.
A few other questions coming in on like this learning process for your team. And I see Ben
asked a question about around Git. Ben, do you want to jump in here?
Yeah, we, there's a lot of interest in R, but then there's this, obviously, backbone of
education, which is Git, which I'm struggling introducing to them, because a lot of the
analysts and data scientists, you know, they're not quote, unquote, engineers. So just curious
if you address that hurdle, if you've seen it, and if the process you went through helped.
Right. So there's a couple of things happening with our access to Git right now. Sorry,
I just bumped my chair. And we have limited access to it at this point. There's ongoing
conversations between IT and data engineers, and the informatics side of the house, where
informatics is, is, you know, convincing and showing the business case that we need to be
able to do DevOps. That's not been understood, you know, by IT in the past. And so, so we're,
we're trying to get access to, you know, Git. And right now we can use Azure DevOps,
but not many of us are, most of us are more familiar with GitHub.
So most of that learning is really focused out of all of us as state employees have access to the
a resource at the state of Oregon library. It's a library that's part of the state government.
And it's, so it provides resources to state agencies. And one of our resources is the
O'Reilly learning platform. And so we can go on to O'Reilly and take any of those asynchronous
courses and live courses. And, and, you know, we're supported in, in learning through, through
that resource as well. And I've taken a handful of like Brent Laster, I think does some, some
Git courses through O'Reilly that have been really helpful, like just learning command line Git.
But, you know, it's even the part where we're convincing folks to, you know, you do want to
spend this kind of time learning R. We have to also have the discussion about how learning is
part of your productivity. Right. And that if we're not learning, we're actually, you know,
we're actually losing ground on building capacity for our future work, because we're not going to
ever have less work to do. Right. And so a lot of what we're doing is trying to find ways to
be more efficient with the work that we do. But as soon as we're doing, you know, we save,
oh, I automated this report and I saved myself, you know, 10 hours every quarter from re-running
this report. Well, those 10 hours are like, as soon as you say that, like that, that time is
going to another project that also really needs to get done. Right. So, so we do have to say, well,
even though you have that pressure, your learning is part of the productivity. And so there's time
that, that time that you're spending there, isn't just, you know, there there's meeting your
learning objectives as part of, you know, what we're here to do. And it's just as part of much
part of your outcome. Right. Or output. Any other questions on the learning? I could pivot to
another one of these questions about the data or. Yeah, I'll, I'll, I'll handle the questions. I
have the Posit team around helping me. Okay. Thanks. But I see Alan, you had asked a question
around the data landscape. Do you want to jump in here? Yeah, sure. Hi, Andy. So like big picture,
I'm super fascinated at how, like I conceive of emergency services as being like this whole other
like ring of service providers in the medical like landscape. And I'm curious how they interact
like with, with you as an agency. And then like tactically, how does, how does their data become,
come into your landscape? And then, and I know I'm sort of rolling on and on, but I'm really
curious, like what kinds of problems are you solving with that data? Is it about like research?
Is it about, is it about where people are in terms of location, like distribution of services and,
and that kind of stuff? I realize there's, there's a bunch there, whatever is kind of
interesting in there that you want to speak to, I'd love to hear about. Yeah. So, so our,
our program is the regulatory body. We're the regulators, folks that provide these services
are licensed through our office and the, and there are standards of care in, in place for
providing those services. And we collect the data for that to be able to do quality improvement and
to do compliance work. So we, we do compliance for, for ambulance services. And part of that is a,
you know, reviewing your records and are you completing your, your patient care records?
You know, are you appropriately checking the right boxes for, you know, particular cases?
So there's, and then we, and we also do that for trauma hospitals as well. So certified trauma
centers that data is used to, you know, verify aspects of the, of the patient care itself,
and also verify aspects of their performance improvement because all trauma hospitals are
required to have an ongoing performance improvement program. So, so essentially the,
the data is used for compliance and safety, but it is also used for, in the field,
it can be used for decision-making in, in patient care. So one of the problems that we've
tackled recently is documentation of weight for patients who receive a weight-based medication
in the field. And so this is especially important in pediatrics. And our program was able to collect
data to see, you know, when there's a weight-based medication that is administered in the field,
how often is the weight documented in the record? We developed a performance metric out of this,
and we did a letter writing campaign to our ambulance agencies. And now our, our expectation
was that this would be, you know, a pretty conventional thing. We'd see a 20% response
rate or something super low, but it was, it was off, it was off the chart. We went from,
you know, somewhere in the, you know, below our threshold to almost 100%
within like a couple of months of implementing of that letter writing campaign and sharing back
with everyone their performance metric and where they were compared to where we are as the state.
And we're now doing multiple performance metrics. And so we do them for both EMS and trauma. A lot
of that is on our website. So I hope I touched on some of that in terms of how the data gets to us.
We actually manage, we have third-party vendors who provide electronic patient care record
software. And we have, so we have a vendor who provides us software for our
electronic medical records systems, and then also for our licensing management system,
and then also for the trauma registry. And the folks that do the EMS system also provide
our stroke and care registry integrations as well. And so we do a lot of vendor management
and a lot of user support between our users and things that we can do with the vendor,
but things we also have to ask the vendor to do for us, you know.
Awesome. Thank you. Yeah, that touched on like a whole bunch of stuff I'm interested in. It sounds
like a neat landscape of like complex systems, and then your ability to pull like performance
things out of that data and address it directly, I think is really cool. It's super neat to think
about. Thanks. Yeah. And R is really crucial to that whole workflow because without it, you know,
we're using the vendor's tools to assess how those software are performing, but that's not
always even possible. And so having a way to, you know, pull data from one table,
look at where things are moving into a submissions table from the other side, look at what was
received on the other side. I've, since joining this team, I'm learning XML and HL7 and some of
these other, you know, ways of moving data between systems that, you know, it's definitely
not where I thought I was headed, but it's super exciting. I want to make sure I jump over to some
of the Slido questions too. So just to remind everybody, if you joined a little bit later,
you can also ask questions anonymously on Slido. But one of the, and Hannah will share that in
the chat, but one of the link questions there was what kinds of governance or policies do you have
for using R across your agency? So for example, deployment guidelines or software upgrade policies,
approved packages. Yeah, that is really loosely defined at the moment. At the moment it's R is
only supported at the individual desktop level. And you have to go through an exceptions process
to be able to download it. And then everyone is on their own for managing their own package
libraries. It's pretty, you know, incongruous in terms of being able to collaborate there.
You have to do a lot of your own lift to ensure that, you know, that everyone can open and run
the same projects if that's what you're trying to do. And so we're really trying to work towards
having an enterprise supported solution. And that's been a long haul. There's a lot of grant money
that's going in to support it, but there's also bureaucracy and transparency that, you know,
that we are in that we have to, we just have processes we have to go through. And so it takes
longer than we think it should sometimes. But, you know, we're spending taxpayer money. And
we also have grant grantees, you know, grant funders that we have to report back to. And so
yeah, just trying to figure out how to do that. But right now it's not very coordinated.
I don't know how I'm about to ask this question. I haven't formulated it in my head.
Sure. Okay.
I feel like you were very creative with getting around some of that to at least push things
forward with being able to train new users and bring together this community. And I think it's
worth talking about that too. Like you've maybe hit roadblocks in one way, but went in a different
direction. Yeah, I mean, so I guess it's a matter of, I guess, accepting the things
we can control and focusing on the areas where we have some agency. And so, you know, if we're told
you can't use that tool right now, you have to go through this process of approval that is,
you know, 12 steps deep and 14 different programs are going to touch that process.
I'm kind of exaggerating here, but it's a lot. And, you know, for a lot of really good reasons,
a lot of legal reasons too. And at each one of these roadblocks, we just say, okay,
so we're not able to move forward with this in this way. Now we're going to try to keep
moving in this direction. What can we do with the resources and the time that we have?
And then we brainstorm a little bit and see what ideas are in the room.
And then just kind of go from there. So a lot of this isn't me doing it. I'm just asking questions.
And then I'm, you know, doing what I can to support folks in us, you know, following up and
supporting each other. Thank you. And I see some of my colleagues are in here popping some comments
in the chat too. So I love that some folks have been able to join and share as well. Because really,
I did want to bring more of the group experience here and not just, you know, my own thing. I might
share a couple of shiny app links for some injury data, just to give these folks some
kudos because the learning with them has been really awesome. And I'm really proud of the
work we're doing together. Absolutely. If you want to call anybody up here.
I see, Abigail, you had a question a bit earlier regarding the training piece.
Do you want to ask that? Yeah. So I've worked with the government too. And I would never suggest,
like, don't train people because they'll leave. Like, that's terrible. But like, how do you think
about the training piece? And when you're training people in some skills that will make them able,
you know, more able to leave possibly for more money? How do you think about
supporting them and what you can do to keep them after they're trained up?
That's a really good question. And I'm not a manager. So I don't really know what they do
to keep people engaged, even without the learning. Right? Just the fact that we're doing this work,
it pays more in the private sector. Like, it just does. Especially for folks who want to live
in Portland, like, you know, where Portland has a higher, there's areas in the state that have a
much higher cost of living than other areas in the state. And for a lot of us, we're working
remotely. And so there was, you know, a lot of folks decided to move to smaller towns because
the cost of living and inflation just, you know, really kind of took a lot of progress from, you
know, folks in public, you know, in public sector pay in the last couple of years. So
I don't really have a good answer for that. What I, the only thing I will say is,
in terms of what we can do for each other on a team, is that, is creating the culture that,
that keeps people engaged. And that makes people feel like they're a part of something larger,
right? And feeling connected. One of the things we hear a lot from folks in this group is,
I feel like I'm the only one on my team using R. And 100 people after two months just is showing
us that that's not really necessarily the case, that there are other people potentially using it,
or even wanting to learn. And we're just not able to connect with one another. And so I think
having these communities is one of these ways that we can start to engage folks. But also,
I'm not sure that there's a really easy answer for that. Because, of course, folks are,
you know, willing to, or, you know, we have agency to work for whomever we want to. And public
sector just has to, I don't know, it's, I think nonprofits have this, have a similar, you know,
a similar challenge in that, like, you want to support your people to learn and grow. And you
want to keep them. And sometimes that means we have to pay them what they think they're worth.
So, like, that's just a challenge of how to, how to make that fit. Yeah, it's not a good answer.
No, I mean, it's right. Yeah, no, it's hard. It's something we've really struggled with, with,
like, self helpers, too. It's tough to keep people. Cybersecurity, that's a big one. They just leave.
Yeah, yeah. So I don't know, maybe, maybe we start training people knowing that,
that if we're only supporting them in, in growing in skills, and not supporting in everything else,
that that's just what's gonna happen. And then you got to plan for that. I don't know. I mean,
part of what keeps me here is that our organization really does focus on racial
justice. We do focus on equity work, we do focus on these other pieces that make me feel like I'm
contributing to the community in a way that's beyond just improving our, you know, our healthcare
system. And that's part of what keeps me here. Isn't the quote, like, what if I train them and
they leave? But what if you don't, and they stay? Yeah, right. Yeah.
Let's jump over to one other question from Slido was Oregon is known for great community
responder programs. How does this impact your work?
Yeah, I think that there's a lot going on in Oregon with
expanding community paramedicine and
having support for behavioral health crises that isn't, you know, the first person responding is a
is a behavioral health specialist and not a medical provider, right? So there's some,
and they're sorry, I'm a little distracted by some of the comment fun comments going on in the
chat. It is really hard. No, it's fun. It's no, it's totally it's all it's all fun. Please keep
it going. Yeah. And so like, as regulators, we kind of have to be, you know, we have to be really
clear with here's the line at which if you're doing patient care, you have to have patient
care record systems. You know, these are the rules, right? We have to be really clear with
what the rules are. And then if you're, you know, not, if you're not
providing those services, then, you know, there's, there's certainly ways in which our
our advisory groups are involved in those other groups. So like Mountain Rescue has a person who
sits on our EMS state committee, for example. So, you know, like they're not necessarily an
ambulance transporting agency, but they're certainly involved in a lot of different types of,
you know, events. And so, so those folks kind of get involved in our, in our community groups.
We have several, we have regional trauma advisory boards. We have a state trauma advisory board and
a state EMS advisory board. We have a couple of data working groups that we run with, you know,
folks that are kind of our data super users in both EMS and trauma. And so really in terms of
community involvement, we're more of like providing information and helping connect resources
and not doing a whole lot of the, like the community's doing the work and then coming to
us and saying, hey, we're seeing this, what can we do? And we try to put together some resources
and work with them. Thank you. I see, Jared, you had a question a bit earlier about working
with HIPAA data. Do you want to jump in here? Hi, Eddie. Sorry. Yeah, I, I think for me, it's
like I've, you speak on so many things that I, I've dealt with, but how do you manage to,
like on a public health level, do you talk with other states or even at a national level to like,
like collaborate on future kind of future initiatives or future endeavors where,
where those like, you know, when I, when I was in my role, like HIPAA was not as much of a concern
with a lot of the data we were, we were collating and bringing together. But I feel like in your
role, it's got to be a lot more, an important, like kind of staple that may prevent collaboration
from happening. So I just didn't know if you could kind of speak on how that all has kind of
come into your fold and how you've managed it. Yeah. So for the most part, our vendors
are required to be compliant under a handful of things. HIPAA is just one of them, right? And
there's other cybersecurity things that they have to be compliant with. And so, so we're
very much like, it's very much part of our data governance, right? Is that we're all of our
systems are compliant with those requirements. It definitely also comes into play when, with our
fulfilling data requests. But it's, at this point, it's not so much an obstacle as just
part of the framework that we're operating under. And so, you know, we have to use secure,
you know, secure tools for doing any data sharing when we're doing our
compliance work with hospitals, for example. Right. And so that's,
you know, I have a cybersecurity team that I call them and say, Hey, this is what we're doing.
Are we good? And, and there's either. So there's, it's a, it's a huge team effort.
The HIPAA stuff is really just part, is just part of our data governance. It's, it's just,
yeah, it's, it just seems like it's part of whatever we're doing. And I don't really have
to worry about that so much as much as I've just got the rules, you know, the rules that I follow.
And that's how we're, that's how we operate. It's probably not a, not a really great question for
that, but sorry, not a, not a great answer for your question, but. No, it makes sense. I think
it's, it's just about knowing, like you brought up that you have, you know, like kind of a
cybersecurity department that allows you to like be your conscience when it comes to sharing data
and doing things like that. Cause we, it was more of like in my role, it was more like,
if you don't feel comfortable, then don't do it. But how do you manage that to a degree when you're
trying to work across multiple public health organizations to try and find some level of
consistency or standardization, how you're doing things. And so then that became a bigger,
a bigger conversation, a bigger problem. So I just was kind of curious how Oregon, I never got that
far, that far to the coast, but I was like, I wonder how big this could be made. I know,
you know, there's some governance at the national level, but could this be an okay thing of like,
Hey, if you're having a lot of issues in Oregon, maybe, you know, Washington or maybe California
is having, you know, similar things and you guys can kind of talk and collaborate to, to come up
with, with answers, if that makes sense. Yeah. And we, we certainly do that. There's,
so there are national standards for EMS data. I dropped a link in the chat for the, the NEMSIS,
the organization that, that handles all that. There's also national data standards for,
for trauma. And definitely like one of the things that I'm, I feel like I'm really good at is like,
I get to a situation where I'm like, Hmm, this is something I haven't done before.
And I have a sense of what I'm going to do, but I want to talk to somebody who's done this before.
I have no problems going onto a bunch of websites, trying to find my counterparts
in other states. You know, I've connected to folks in Iowa. In fact, this weekend at the
Cascadia R conference, I was able to connect with some of our counterparts at Washington,
state of Washington department of health. And so, yeah, definitely.
Are the data manager for my program is right now at a conference for national EMS data managers.
Like there's, you know, there's, there certainly is supported a national level and we are
really trying to connect with other, our users in those, at the, in those places,
because the data does have national standards. We've got a lot of our code that, you know,
is works with those data dictionaries that, you know, we're using for doing things that are both
human and machine readable. And we would love to share some of that with other folks that are
our users. And so I'm packaging it. Thank you, Ted. That's, that's my big thing that I'm working
on right now is building some internal packages and I'm, I need to learn how to do better testing
and, and all that. So anybody else learning that stuff right now, I'm, I'm game for,
for study, study buddies. Awesome. When I, when I see a comment in the chat with like a
ton of replies on it, I feel like that indicates that something good we should chat about right
now. And so Eugene, I see you had put a comment into the chat around like issues with working
with certain APIs and wondered if you wanted to like jump in here and just share what you're
experiencing and see if we can maybe figure something out here as a group.
Um, I, I guess what I, what I was bringing up is the challenge of, you know, feeling alone
working with R. I am totally the, the one man team, three quarter stack ML engineer, I'll call
it. And I could be full stack, but we, you know, we don't have a good sort of like posit, um,
shiny server, you know, enterprise solution where I could just put my stuff up there. So,
um, I'm sort of, you know, clunking through with open source, uh, shiny server and
allowing one person at a time to use my, my app for the one use case. But anyway,
have HTTR, you know, is, is a very well full featured API HTTP request, uh, package.
And I went through some issues trying to figure out why I was automatically being dropped by,
I'm also in government, I'm a government contractor. So I'm pulling from the VA,
I'm pulling from Vista, which is this monster monster database. And there's a few layers of
abstraction between it. And we built our, I should say some people in our company built a
wonderful, uh, soap API standard that allows me to do multiple types of requests. And all of them
yet, um, thrown in my arguments and, you know, there's an iteration, you kind of have to do one
thing to open your connection, get the cookies, you got to do another thing to follow up and
select your patient. And then you got to select, you know, what you want to do with that page or
how you want to get that patient's data. And these things, depending on the time of day,
it drops at night, but it doesn't drop during the day or you know, something with
Neil shoddy. So I keep, you know, texting back and forth, hey, this is what I'm getting. What
what do you need to see to help me help you debug why this connection keeps dropping? And it just
turned into well, the people that are using this are using, you know, Python, they're doing it with
this request package. I don't know what you're doing. I don't know how it works. I don't know
what HTTR is. And you must you have to change to a fully featured API request, you know, type of
package if you're if I'm going to continue supporting you, period. And that like, I've
always had good interactions with this person until this just really broke the mic. Okay,
fine. I'll do it all myself. You know, so it was that statement. I don't know if there's the right
question for how to do it. But I am building a little arm markdown report right where I'm going
to extract every little freaking thing that HTTR can produce from a the request object that comes
back and I will put it out in PDF format and hand it over and just say, please go figure out what to
do because you know, I, I don't know what else to do from a dialogue point of view. I'm going to
just produce technical documentation errors and send it right back to them and say, hey, I need
help. Feels like this is a communication collaboration piece that we've talked about
through some other hangouts at one point or another too. But I'm curious if anybody has
experienced something similar or has maybe some some ideas to share. And Andy, I think you were
going to start with sharing something too. No, I was just gonna say I'm having some
feeling. Some of my feelings are being reflected in the chat right now. So I'll just say that.
Yeah, I'm going to agree that it sounds like there's a communication piece there,
layer to that in addition to the technical aspect. If I had a question about API stuff and why
something isn't working for me, I would ask Ted. If I couldn't Google it. I don't have a lot of
experience. Don't make me the authority. No, I won't. I won't. I won't. I'm just I'm just saying
what would I do in this situation if I found myself struggling with with an API? I you know,
I just I guess we if I found a limit where I'm finding that someone is running out of ideas
for helping me work through a technical problem, I guess there's you know, I don't
know. Pointing out all the things that are wrong with something someone's working on
is probably not going to help them be motivated to help you fix what you're trying to do with
the thing they're working on. So I try to adjust how I'm seeing it and say, okay, we're on the same
team here and we just are seeing this from a different, you know, it's the elephant. I'm
seeing the I'm seeing the the trunk only and I'm trying to get to this other part of it and the
and the person doesn't see how what what it is that I'm seeing. And so maybe the process of doing
all that documentation, you'll find something else there that you didn't see before and then
sharing that process with this other person might also open the door. I don't know.
Kind of remind it's my memory is being triggered back to a hangout with
Matt Frazier when he was talking about like non-violent communication that book.
But talking about how like when you get into this position, like listen for needs and express
needs. So starting with like just explaining I'm trying to do this for the organization like
like I'm trying to help the company. This is why I think this is valuable. Like do you agree
that this is valuable like taking the technical part of it but like getting by and first that
what you're trying to do is going to be helpful and then saying like in order to do that.
I have these needs that aren't being met like how can we get to that next step.
I'll share the recording here in the chat in a second too. Another Harold we'll shift gears here
but I figured because there's so much conversation there on on that one that would be a good one to
dive into. If anybody had other thoughts you wanted to share there feel free to raise your hand
too. I think Abigail you had shared a few things there. No I'm good. I don't I for some reason it
feels better to say you should use Python in chat than it does not in chat. I don't know.
Okay well we can keep the conversation happening in chat too.
But Sanjay I saw you had asked a question about EMS and the data formats. Do you want to jump in
here? Yeah so nationally in the US you've got a lot of data integration obviously across hospitals
and what I heard you saying Andy was that you've got vendors and you've got EMS systems
implemented separately for each hospital or each state. Is that like that? If it is separate then
how do you integrate the data across states? That's a really really great question. So
yes each state implements the national state data standard in the way that they
want to do it. So California a lot of larger states that have a lot more hospitals trauma
centers than than Oregon does they tell everybody okay you're required to do this data you're
required to submit this data to the state here's the state repository go out and get your software
and send it to us because we're the regulators you know and so that's really left up to those
organizations they go and they they procure software they those vendors set up you know
data pipelines between the databases and then it works right supposedly. I mean that's
that's the idea. What ends up happening is because of requirements for data validation
and which a lot of this is built into the software and requirements for
certain hospitals level ones level twos and level there's four levels of trauma accreditation and
those are based on the levels of trauma care that can be provided those hospitals and so
everything but your level four is on the national level is recommended that they provide that data
to not only their state agencies but the national database and so those software vendors that are
supporting that provide the service to either state agencies like our program or the hospitals
they have you know widgets within there that provide that do that national data validation
and submissions for national data. With the most recent version of the EMS data
there is now a data field that is a universally unique identifier for the record itself not the
patient but the record and that can now be linked at the national level to the the trauma record and
so there there's an effort now within the data standards to be able to link these at a national
level. That work is ongoing it's Oregon was I think the seventh or ninth state to adopt the
new standard and start to implement this this UUID which means that our our interoperability
between EMS data and trauma data you know like we really have to focus on that when when the
linkage doesn't work that UUID doesn't move between the data systems and you know and and
we're gonna we're gonna just have for this first year or two some some data that isn't quite as
completely linked as we want it to but it's just a matter of improving that as we go.
Oregon does provide the service the the software for all of the hospitals they're allowed to use
that for for free they can just you know we provide the technical support they can also
go and get their own implementation of an integration between their hospital electronic
health care records a couple of our hospitals do that and then a couple of the hospitals
have their own system and export data to us so it's a lot of it's kind of all a lot of
different ways that it happens yeah. Thank you. Thank you very much. I know this hour goes by
so quickly um but we were when we were talking about academy and in the beginning I'd love to
see all the the great feedback that you've shared Andy and and I was just curious how did you feel
uh academy was different from other training programs that you tried?
Yeah so the collaboration piece was was big um because we were working together on a weekly basis
um you know we were able to
just form these relations these working relationships with one another in a way that
probably wouldn't have happened if we were just asynchronously doing tutorials together.
And having the mentor available for answering questions and um you know that's
also it's it's not that there's someone who's like the the teacher providing this content
and we are you know taking this content in and doing a thing with it it was almost like um having
a coach instead right um and so the group was able to lean into places where we wanted to learn
and maybe it was outside of the content a little bit and they're just I haven't
really experienced that kind of flexibility with you know with other other platforms.
When you mentioned mentor I realized I missed a question from Ben a bit earlier too. Ben do you
want to jump in here? I think you asked about like what it meant to have a defined mentor.
Yeah I'm sitting over here shoving my face full of chips.
Right yeah the mentor thing is really interesting in that um it's a different role and so I'm more
I'm curious how influential it was through the process you mentioned coach but it really is a
different aspect to it and so I was curious how you're carrying that on and if there is something
that you're looking to in the future as you develop the community if there is something
you could clearly define to the internal team this if you might fill that role with.
Yeah um so
I guess the the coach aspect of it it just feels like there's a slightly different power dynamic
than with the instructor and student and um it's like there's a little more um
the I guess as a learner I'm able to be a little more self-directed um than than like I'm here to
take a class I guess um even though it really is focused on you know here you're learning goals
and stuff as far as mentors um we haven't really um had I feel like we've we've sort of rather than
leaning on that one mentor that we had during that academy session we've sort of branched out
and developed a network of mentors um several of whom are just positive employees that are here to
support us right um and so um so we've asked Jeremy Allen to come and give our group a um
a quarto demo you know um and I probably could have put together a quarto demo but like Jeremy's
just really good so having you know having someone come in and and and kind of step up to that is
has been really great um in terms of how we're going to support each other
you know I think that that's that mentor is really just a hat that we can wear and sometimes
I'm the mentor and sometimes I'm the mentee right and just um trying to establish the relationships
where we can take those hats on and off and I'm not required all the time to answer someone's
questions right like we we're all here to get our work done also right so um
I think one thing we might try to do as the group is um is do like some computer lab uh office hour
study hour kind of things where we can all show up and we can work on our own things but then we
can be there to sort of support each other and answer questions like that's been a thing that
I thought would be um fun and amazing to do um be nice to figure out how to do that in a hybrid
setting so that you know folks who are living in other parts of the state and working in different
programs throughout the state could still participate and learn with us um but I haven't
quite figured out all the logistic details on that one yeah and Jerry is awesome I'm seeing
some of that in the chat Jeremy Jeremy is awesome yeah um one other slide of question I saw that
just came in was could you talk a bit more about the team aspect of the work is the analytics
in the agency centralized or do teams get put together for specific projects
that's a really great question there's a little bit of both so we have a data team in EMS and um
there is also a like like a health policy and analytics section in division in the in the agency
um where they really are focused on just like data and statistics um as it relates to policy
and programs um but uh and then there's specific like analytics and informatics teams within
programs like our acute and communicable disease program has an analytics team where they've got a
data integrator they've got a data visualization specialist um you know they've got um reporting
specialists who build you know some of these dashboards that injury dashboards and things
um so it's it's kind of a little bit of both it's really dependent on the needs of the program
and the resources that the agency has to kind of support um where that work is I think there's a
couple of programs that probably really need analysts and they're you know working on kind
of building that capacity and stuff great thank you so much Andy yeah um I feel like we're like
standing on stage and people are chanting for encore because I see people asking do we have a
bonus hour right now um so I know people have to drop to other uh meetings here so I always want
to say thank you all so much for joining us today and thank you Andy um I I know you probably have
to leave to another meeting but I can hang around for a little bit longer if people wanted to
to chat too I just want to say thanks for this opportunity I get so much from this group um
when whenever I'm here and even if I'm like you know having to work on other stuff and I'm just
kind of you know here to to to listen and learn I just get so much from this group and so it's
just really been awesome to be able to um you know share back so thank you I love that thank you so
much Andy it's I can't believe how long we've been doing these now and like just getting to
actually know people through the hangout is it's awesome yeah yeah it's awesome well have a great
rest of the day everybody Olivia your cat is amazing you need to talk so I can see your cat
right now oh my gosh I'm sorry he has been um he just wants every moment of my time and he's
been jumping onto my laptop and pressing keys and changing things on my screen so sorry he
he did a lot of zoom bombing today thank you I just pinned your video so that I can only see you right
now thank you Andy hi guys absolutely thanks everybody thanks everyone have a great rest of
the day take care all right bye everybody bye Luke I see you're still here did you have other
things you want to chat about no I was just well I guess my curiosity if Andy's still around is um
where I know we have an issue with um our regulatory body in L.A. County like they have
different accounting for um their upload time as opposed to like ours in the EHR
so I wonder like just how you guys have kind of negotiated
like when you have discrepancies depending on who's reporting what
um
so like discrepancies in just um like we're seeing certain records coming over and we're
not seeing other records or like actual within the record discrepancies like
the record has this over here and it's something else in this system um the idea is more like when
it comes to like patient offload times um maybe like the um maybe the EMS will like start
the we'll start like there we we arrive at your time at a different point than we would in EMR
so like there's they're saying like you know the moment they like pull into the parking lot is like
when they started and maybe you're saying it's like the moment they're entered into the system
or something like that it's kind of like how do you kind of back and forth because you know they'll
be like hey you know you're um you know 15 or 20 minutes over the ideal and it's like well
yeah I wonder so one of the things that we work on pretty um consistently is um
having a demographics profile from every vendor that's participating in providing data to the EMS
system and then they're required to have their system set up under like really tight specifications
for how each data element is collected and then mapped to the state registry and we do um like
schema validation to ensure that you know that the date that is shown in your record is what
comes over in our record and if it's the same time it's actually the same time if it's the you
know um transport time it's you know it's uh and so aside from like working with those vendors on
you know really drilling into what information is being stored where and how that's moving from one
system to another and just really getting into those details like we just have to do that one
vendor at a time sometimes it's one agency at a time right and we're we're dealing with you know
over 200 agencies and a you know half a dozen different vendors um with each of different
you know instance in a different agency so yeah it's really just um the data quality is just kind
of seems like a never-ending uh source of work it's almost like emergencies are a giant data mess
you know for particular reasons like maybe the fact that there are emergencies
but yeah there was actually one time i think we figured out that the discrepancy was because like
they weren't they were not like starting their route until after their smoke break
and this was one of the private us companies that like drops off patients here and we're like
so that's the issue but it's not the issue all the time yeah yeah when the data's right but you
don't like what's in the data like that's a different situation than a mapping issue
the human element of the data was making me think of the the iceland the city of reykjavik
customer story they were like why is this data for who's entering the different pools across island
across iceland not mapping up and it was because when it got really busy they would just open up
the gates and like let everybody out so it looked like people who entered the pools were just staying
they never left yeah
all right well i'm gonna go eat lunch it was nice to see everybody thank you so much andy and
thanks all for sticking around here too yeah thanks everyone bye